# Drafting Other Materials – Elevator Pitch

An “elevator pitch” can be one of your most effective tools. It’s a short,
easily memorized statement that describes yourself, some of your key features as
a job seeker, and your goals. You can use it in a spoken or written context to
help introduce yourself effectively.

Even though employers are unlikely to ask you for an elevator pitch directly,
having one ready will help you in many situations. It can help you draft a cover
letter, speak easily to a potential hirer when you network at an event, answer
general interview questions such as “tell us about yourself,” and so on. In an
interview, it will help you seem poised and prepared.

Your elevator pitch should answer three questions:

* Who are you?
* What do you do?
* What do you want?

## Example

*“Hi, I’m Jonathan Bittmann. I’m a data scientist working toward a move into
management. I’ve spent the last six years as a data analyst for a cloud
development company, where I’ve developed my skills in programming and served as
team leader. While leading several successful project teams, I became interested
in data science management and have gone back to school to earn a business
administration degree. While I’m working on that, I’m looking for a position in
project management so I can put my learning to use. I’m very interested in the
work your company does and I think I could bring a lot of expertise and
leadership to your organization. Could we meet to discuss the open project
manager roles you currently have?”*

Let’s break it down and see how you can write an elevator pitch of your own.

Who are you?
Start by introducing yourself with your full name and add your preferred name if
you have one. If you’re in a face-to-face situation, this is a good time to
offer a handshake. Follow this with a statement about your career title and
current situation.

What do you do?
Provide a few key pieces of skill or experience that set you apart and make you
an interesting candidate. Don’t try to list your whole resume – pick a highlight
or two about your recent experience. When you’ve decided on your points, arrange
them in a way that makes sense; you want to tell a story, not just list bullet
points. Making a story out of your points quickly engages your reader’s or
listener’s interest.

What do you want?
Finish with an action request. This could be asking for an interview, stating
why you’re interested in a particular position, or even just asking whether your
statement covers the question they were asking. The idea is to encourage the
other person to engage with you, not just listen to what you’ve said. This will
definitely depend on the context and setting, so think of a few possible
endings.

While you’re composing your elevator pitch, use natural-sounding language and
avoid jargon. You should sound comfortable when you speak it, so remain
professional, but use your own phrasing. Additionally, your pitch should be
easily understood by many people; this will make it useful in many situations.

After you write your pitch, work to memorize it. Practice your pitch until you
are comfortable and can easily deliver it verbally. Slow down and speak clearly.
Being nervous will likely make you speak more quickly, so practice slowing down
and enunciating. Find a friend who will help you memorize it and practice
speaking it. Maybe you can work together on developing elevator pitches for both
of you.

You’ll want to be able to use the pitch in many situations, but sometimes it
will make sense to tailor it to the context you’re in, such as changing what you
request or highlighting slightly different experience. Write the pitch so that
it’s broadly useful but be ready to tailor it as needed.

An effective and well-rehearsed elevator pitch can be extraordinarily useful in
your job search. The payoff for having one ready can be enormous, so it’s well
worth investing the time to develop one.
